Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the physiology of ageing.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin. What do we mean by ageing physiologically,
and what is the central concept the anaesthetist must grasp?
Ageing is the progressive, intrinsic decline in the functional reserve of organ
systems with time, occurring even in the absence of disease,
and proceeding at different rates in different individuals and different organs.
The central concept for the anaesthetist is reduced physiological reserve: at rest,
the ageing body usually maintains homeostasis perfectly well,
so the elderly patient may appear deceptively fit,
but the capacity to respond to a stress — surgery, haemorrhage, hypoxia, sepsis,
a fluid or drug load — is diminished,
and the margin between coping and decompensation is narrow.
This must be separated from disease: ageing per se reduces reserve,
while the high prevalence of co-existing pathology in the elderly — ischaemic heart
disease, hypertension, chronic lung and kidney disease, diabetes — adds a separate,
often larger, burden.
The two interact, so that an age-related fall in reserve leaves less margin to
tolerate the diseases that age also brings.
Biological age, better captured by frailty,
predicts outcome better than chronological age alone.
The practical consequence is to anticipate that the elderly patient will tolerate
the insults of anaesthesia and surgery less well,
to optimise comorbidity beforehand,
and to anaesthetise with the reduced reserve constantly in mind.
So ageing is the erosion of reserve, distinct from but compounded by disease,
and respecting that narrowed margin is the unifying theme of geriatric anaesthesia.
Describe the cardiovascular changes of ageing, beginning with the arterial system.
The ageing cardiovascular system is dominated by stiffening of the large arteries
and reduced responsiveness.
The elastin of the aorta and great vessels fragments and is replaced by stiffer
collagen, so arterial compliance falls;
the vessels can no longer cushion the pulse, the pulse-wave velocity rises,
and reflected waves return earlier.
The result is a rise in systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure,
isolated systolic hypertension, while diastolic pressure may fall,
and the left ventricle faces a higher afterload.
To cope with that afterload the ventricle hypertrophies and stiffens,
impairing its relaxation and filling — diastolic dysfunction — so that the heart
becomes increasingly dependent on the atrial contribution to filling and on
adequate preload, and tolerates atrial fibrillation,
tachycardia and hypovolaemia poorly.
The stiff ventricle and arteries together make blood pressure swing widely with
small changes in volume or vascular tone,
so the elderly show exaggerated hypotension on induction and exaggerated
hypertension on stimulation. The coronary circulation has less reserve.
So the ageing arterial tree stiffens,
driving systolic hypertension and ventricular hypertrophy with diastolic
dysfunction, and the practical signature is a pressure-labile,
preload-dependent circulation intolerant of both under- and over-filling.
What happens to the myocardium and the autonomic responsiveness of the heart?
Alongside the arterial changes, the myocardium itself and its autonomic control
alter with age. There is a modest loss of myocytes with hypertrophy of those
remaining, increased interstitial fibrosis,
and the diastolic dysfunction already described.
Resting systolic function is usually preserved,
but the maximal achievable cardiac output and the ability to augment output under
stress are reduced.
A key change is blunted responsiveness to beta-adrenergic stimulation:
receptor numbers and post-receptor signalling decline,
so the heart's rate and contractility respond less to circulating and administered
catecholamines, and the maximum heart rate achievable falls — roughly as two
hundred and twenty minus age.
This means the elderly heart augments output under stress less by increasing rate
and contractility, as the young heart does,
and more by the Frank–Starling mechanism,
increasing stroke volume through filling — which again makes it dependent on
adequate preload.
The conducting system undergoes fibrosis and loss of pacemaker cells,
predisposing to sinus node dysfunction, conduction blocks and atrial fibrillation.
The baroreflex is blunted, impairing the heart-rate response that defends blood
pressure.
So the ageing heart relies on preload rather than on a blunted catecholamine
response to raise output, conducts less reliably, and defends pressure poorly,
all of which reduce its tolerance of the haemodynamic challenges of anaesthesia.
Now the respiratory system. How does it change with age?
The ageing respiratory system shows reduced elastic recoil, stiffer chest wall,
weaker muscles and impaired gas exchange and control, all reducing reserve.
The lung loses elastic tissue, so its recoil falls — a change resembling mild
emphysema — which raises the closing capacity,
the volume at which small airways begin to close.
By around the mid-sixties supine, and the mid-forties erect in some,
the closing capacity exceeds the functional residual capacity,
so airways close during normal tidal breathing,
causing areas of low ventilation-to-perfusion ratio and shunt,
and a progressive fall in the resting arterial oxygen tension — roughly the
expected value declines by a small amount each decade.
The chest wall stiffens with calcification of costal cartilages and kyphosis,
while the respiratory muscles weaken,
so the work of breathing rises and the maximum ventilatory capacity and the ability
to cough and clear secretions fall.
Crucially, the ventilatory responses to both hypoxia and hypercapnia are markedly
blunted, so the elderly mount a smaller protective increase in breathing when
oxygen falls or carbon dioxide rises,
and are more sensitive to the respiratory depression of opioids and residual
anaesthetic.
Protective airway reflexes are also diminished, raising aspiration risk.
So ageing lowers resting oxygenation through airway closure,
stiffens and weakens the pump, and blunts the chemical control of breathing,
leaving the elderly prone to hypoxaemia, atelectasis and respiratory complications.
Tell me about renal changes with age and their implications.
The ageing kidney loses both mass and function progressively.
Nephrons are lost — renal mass falls by around a quarter to a third by old age —
and the glomerular filtration rate declines,
by roughly one millilitre per minute per year from middle age,
though serum creatinine may remain deceptively normal because muscle mass,
and so creatinine production, also falls;
an estimated or calculated clearance is therefore more reliable than creatinine
alone.
Tubular function declines too: the ability to concentrate and to dilute urine is
reduced, as is the ability to conserve or excrete sodium and to handle an acid or
potassium load, so the elderly defend volume and electrolyte balance poorly and are
vulnerable to both dehydration and overload, and to hyperkalaemia.
The responsiveness to antidiuretic hormone and to aldosterone is blunted,
and thirst is diminished, so dehydration is common and often unrecognised.
The reduced reserve makes the ageing kidney far more susceptible to acute kidney
injury from the hypotension, hypovolaemia and nephrotoxins of the perioperative
period.
For pharmacology, the fall in filtration prolongs the elimination of renally
cleared drugs and their active metabolites — morphine-six-glucuronide,
for example — so doses are reduced and intervals lengthened.
So ageing reduces nephron number and filtration, impairs fluid,
electrolyte and acid handling, heightens vulnerability to acute injury,
and slows renal drug clearance, all demanding careful perioperative fluid and drug
management.
What hepatic and metabolic changes occur with ageing?
The liver, like the kidney, loses mass and blood flow with age.
Hepatic mass falls by perhaps twenty to forty per cent by old age,
and hepatic blood flow falls in parallel, by around a per cent a year,
reducing the clearance of flow-limited,
high-extraction drugs such as morphine and propofol,
whose elimination depends on delivery.
The intrinsic metabolic capacity is more variably affected:
phase-one oxidative metabolism through the cytochrome enzymes tends to decline,
slowing the clearance of capacity-limited drugs,
whereas phase-two conjugation reactions are relatively preserved,
which is one reason agents cleared by conjugation, such as lorazepam,
or by organ-independent routes are sometimes preferred.
Plasma protein concentrations change: albumin tends to fall modestly,
raising the free fraction of acidic, albumin-bound drugs,
while alpha-one-acid glycoprotein may rise. Synthetic reserve is reduced.
Metabolically, basal metabolic rate falls with the loss of lean tissue,
glucose tolerance declines so that a degree of insulin resistance and
hyperglycaemia is common, and the response to the stress of surgery may be altered.
So ageing reduces hepatic mass and flow,
slowing the clearance of flow-limited and oxidatively metabolised drugs while
sparing conjugation, alters protein binding,
and brings a general decline in metabolic rate and glucose tolerance — all of which
feed into the altered pharmacology of the elderly.
Describe the changes in the central nervous system,
including the effect on anaesthetic requirement.
The ageing central nervous system shows loss of neurons and synapses,
reduced brain volume, declines in several neurotransmitter systems — notably the
cholinergic system, important for cognition — and reduced cerebral blood flow and
metabolic rate, though autoregulation is generally preserved.
Functionally there is increased sensitivity to central depressant drugs:
for the same plasma concentration the elderly brain shows a greater effect,
so the doses of induction agents, opioids,
benzodiazepines and volatile agents required are reduced,
over and above any pharmacokinetic change.
This is quantified for the volatile agents by the fall in minimum alveolar
concentration with age, by roughly six per cent per decade beyond middle age,
so an eighty-year-old needs substantially less volatile agent than a forty-year-old.
Two clinical syndromes are central to geriatric anaesthesia.
Postoperative delirium is an acute,
fluctuating disturbance of attention and cognition, common in the elderly,
associated with longer stay and worse outcome,
and precipitated by drugs — especially anticholinergics and benzodiazepines — pain,
sepsis, metabolic disturbance and the unfamiliar environment.
Postoperative cognitive dysfunction is a more subtle,
longer-lasting decline in memory and executive function.
Both are commoner with greater age and frailty.
So the ageing brain is more sensitive to anaesthetic drugs,
needs lower doses with a lower MAC,
and is vulnerable to delirium and cognitive dysfunction,
which guides drug choice and the avoidance of deliriogenic agents.
How is the pharmacokinetic handling of drugs altered by the body-composition
changes of ageing?
Ageing changes body composition in ways that systematically alter drug
distribution. Total body water and lean muscle mass fall,
while the proportion of body fat rises.
The fall in lean mass and total body water reduces the volume of distribution of
water-soluble drugs, so a given dose produces a higher initial plasma concentration
— an argument for smaller, slower loading doses of water-soluble agents.
The rise in body fat increases the volume of distribution of lipid-soluble drugs,
so they distribute more widely and,
because they are released slowly from the enlarged fat depot,
their elimination half-life is prolonged and their effect lingers — relevant to
lipophilic agents and to the accumulation of repeated or infused doses.
Reduced plasma albumin raises the free,
active fraction of acidic protein-bound drugs.
Clearance is reduced by the renal and hepatic changes already discussed.
The cardiovascular changes also slow circulation time,
so the onset of intravenous drugs is delayed and the temptation to give a second
dose before the first has acted must be resisted.
So the redistribution of body composition lowers the volume of distribution for
water-soluble drugs while raising it and prolonging the effect for lipid-soluble
ones, reduced binding raises free drug,
and clearance falls — the kinetic basis for the maxim to give less and to give it
more slowly.
Combine that with the pharmacodynamic changes — what is your overall prescribing
principle?
Pharmacodynamically, the ageing brain and other tissues are more sensitive to many
drugs, so that even at the same plasma concentration the effect is greater;
this is well shown for the central depressants,
where reduced doses are needed for both kinetic and dynamic reasons.
The cardiovascular system, with its blunted baroreflex and reduced
beta-responsiveness, is also more sensitive to the haemodynamic effects of
anaesthetic agents, hence the exaggerated hypotension on induction.
Combining the kinetic changes — smaller volume of distribution for water-soluble
drugs, prolonged effect of lipid-soluble drugs,
reduced binding and reduced clearance — with this increased sensitivity yields the
central prescribing principle in the elderly: start low and go slow.
Loading doses are reduced, titrated carefully against effect rather than given as a
fixed bolus; adequate time is allowed for onset before supplementing,
recognising the slowed circulation;
and maintenance doses and infusion rates are reduced and dosing intervals
lengthened to allow for slow clearance.
Drugs with active metabolites that accumulate,
and deliriogenic drugs such as long-acting benzodiazepines and anticholinergics,
are minimised, and organ-independent agents favoured.
Depth-of-anaesthesia and neuromuscular monitoring help avoid overdose and residual
effect.
So the unifying rule is reduced, slowly titrated dosing to effect,
allowing for delayed onset and prolonged offset,
with careful drug selection — the practical translation of altered kinetics and
heightened sensitivity.
Why is thermoregulation impaired in the elderly?
The elderly defend body temperature poorly,
for reasons that span every limb of the thermoregulatory system,
and they become hypothermic perioperatively more readily and more deeply than the
young.
Heat production is reduced because basal metabolic rate falls with the loss of lean
muscle, and the shivering response is weaker for the same reason.
The sensing and central integration of temperature are blunted,
and the thresholds for response are shifted,
so the elderly perceive cold less acutely and mount their defences later and less
vigorously; the interthreshold range is widened even before anaesthesia.
The cutaneous vasoconstrictor response that conserves heat is impaired by stiffer,
less reactive vessels, and reduced subcutaneous fat lowers passive insulation.
On top of these intrinsic changes, comorbidity and medication further impair
regulation, and reduced mobility limits behavioural defences.
Anaesthesia then widens the interthreshold range further and abolishes
vasoconstriction, so the already-vulnerable elderly patient cools quickly.
Because perioperative hypothermia carries real harms — coagulopathy,
wound infection, cardiac stress, shivering and delayed drug metabolism — to which
the elderly are themselves more susceptible, active warming is especially important.
So ageing erodes heat production, sensing, central response and conservation alike,
and the elderly need diligent temperature monitoring and active warming.
Tell me about autonomic and baroreflex changes with age.
The autonomic nervous system in ageing shows a characteristic pattern of reduced
responsiveness and impaired homeostatic reflexes.
There is a relative increase in resting sympathetic nervous activity and
circulating noradrenaline, yet a paradoxical reduction in end-organ responsiveness,
particularly the blunted beta-adrenergic response of the heart and vessels already
described, so that despite higher catecholamine levels the cardiovascular reaction
to them is diminished.
The baroreflex — the rapid reflex that adjusts heart rate and vascular tone to
defend blood pressure against postural and other changes — is markedly blunted,
so the elderly compensate poorly for the hypotension of induction, of haemorrhage,
of vasodilatation and of standing.
The consequence is a high prevalence of orthostatic, or postural, hypotension,
and an exaggerated and poorly defended fall in pressure under anaesthesia.
Parasympathetic, vagal tone also declines, reducing heart-rate variability.
These changes interact with the structural cardiovascular changes — the stiff
arteries and preload-dependent ventricle — to produce a circulation that is
pressure-labile and slow to self-correct.
The practical implications are to anticipate and prevent large swings in pressure,
to position and move the patient gently, to give fluids and pressors judiciously,
and to titrate anaesthetic agents slowly.
So ageing blunts the autonomic reflexes that defend blood pressure,
leaving a labile circulation that cannot self-correct,
which underlies much of the haemodynamic instability of elderly anaesthesia.
Comment on the musculoskeletal, skin and positioning considerations in the elderly.
The musculoskeletal and integumentary changes of ageing have direct practical
importance for the conduct of anaesthesia.
Bone density falls — osteoporosis — so bones are fragile and fracture easily;
joints are stiff and often affected by degenerative arthritis,
reducing the range of movement of the neck, jaw and limbs.
This matters for airway management,
where a stiff arthritic cervical spine and temporomandibular joint can make
positioning for laryngoscopy and intubation difficult,
and atlanto-axial instability in rheumatoid disease is a specific hazard.
It matters greatly for positioning on the operating table: stiff,
fragile joints and bones tolerate forced positioning poorly and can be injured,
and limited movement constrains how the patient can be placed for surgery and
regional blocks.
The skin is thin, fragile and less elastic,
with reduced subcutaneous padding and capillary fragility,
so it bruises and tears easily with adhesive tape and is prone to pressure injury
over a long operation, demanding careful padding of pressure points and gentle
handling.
Reduced subcutaneous fat also worsens heat loss and makes vascular access and bony
landmarks more variable.
So ageing leaves fragile bones, stiff joints, a difficult neck and friable skin,
and safe practice requires gentle, well-padded positioning,
anticipation of airway difficulty, and protection of the skin and pressure areas
throughout.
What gastrointestinal and airway-protective changes affect aspiration risk in the
elderly?
Several changes of ageing increase the risk of regurgitation and aspiration and
impair the protection of the airway.
Protective airway reflexes — the cough and the laryngeal and pharyngeal reflexes
that guard against aspiration — are diminished with age,
and are further obtunded by residual anaesthetic and sedation,
so material that reaches the pharynx is less reliably cleared.
Oesophageal motility and lower oesophageal sphincter function decline,
and conditions such as hiatus hernia and gastro-oesophageal reflux are common,
favouring regurgitation.
Gastric emptying may be slowed by comorbidity,
by medication and by autonomic neuropathy in the diabetic elderly.
Dentition is often poor, with loose, capped or absent teeth and dentures,
complicating airway management and posing a risk of dislodged teeth,
and edentulous patients can be difficult to mask-ventilate.
Swallowing itself is less efficient,
raising the risk of aspiration in the perioperative and recovery periods,
and silent aspiration with subsequent pneumonia is a recognised cause of
postoperative morbidity.
The responses are careful airway assessment including dentition,
attention to aspiration prophylaxis and to fasting,
a low threshold for protecting the airway in those at risk,
and vigilance against aspiration during emergence and recovery.
So ageing weakens airway reflexes and oesophageal competence while complicating the
airway with poor dentition, all of which raise aspiration risk and demand specific
attention.
How does the concept of frailty improve on chronological age in predicting outcome?
Frailty is a clinically recognisable state of reduced physiological reserve and
increased vulnerability to stressors,
arising from cumulative decline across multiple systems,
and it captures biological ageing far better than the calendar.
Two patients of the same chronological age may differ enormously:
one robust and independent, the other frail — slow, weak, exhausted,
with unintentional weight loss and low activity, the Fried phenotype,
or a high deficit count on a cumulative index.
Frailty is important to the anaesthetist because it predicts adverse perioperative
outcomes — postoperative complications, delirium, prolonged stay,
loss of independence, institutionalisation and mortality — more powerfully than age
or than individual comorbidities, and it does so across both elective and emergency
surgery.
Recognising it allows realistic risk assessment and shared decision-making about
whether and how to proceed, targeted prehabilitation to build reserve,
and perioperative pathways — comprehensive geriatric assessment,
delirium prevention, early mobilisation and nutrition — that improve outcomes.
It reframes the question from how old the patient is to how much reserve they have.
The practical message is to screen for frailty,
to use it rather than age to gauge risk,
and to apply the multidisciplinary measures it points to.
So frailty is the measurable expression of lost reserve,
a stronger predictor than chronological age,
and a trigger for the optimisation and tailored care that benefit the vulnerable
elderly surgical patient.
Finally, draw these together into your overall approach to anaesthetising the
elderly patient.
Bringing it together, the elderly patient is defined by reduced reserve across
every system, compounded by comorbidity and best gauged by frailty,
and safe anaesthesia is the disciplined respect for that narrowed margin.
Cardiovascularly I anticipate a stiff, preload-dependent,
pressure-labile circulation with a blunted baroreflex and beta-response,
so I maintain preload, avoid large swings,
induce slowly and treat hypotension promptly.
Respiratorily I expect lower resting oxygenation,
airway closure and blunted ventilatory drive, so I preoxygenate,
prevent atelectasis, and use opioids and sedatives sparingly with vigilance for
postoperative respiratory depression.
I reduce drug doses for both kinetic and dynamic reasons — start low, go slow,
titrate to effect, allow for delayed onset and prolonged offset — and I avoid
deliriogenic and accumulating drugs, favouring organ-independent agents,
to protect a sensitive brain prone to delirium and cognitive dysfunction.
I warm actively against impaired thermoregulation,
manage fluids carefully for vulnerable kidneys,
position and handle gently for fragile bones, joints and skin,
and attend to dentition and aspiration risk.
I optimise comorbidity beforehand, screen for frailty,
and apply multidisciplinary perioperative care.
So the unifying principle is that ageing erodes reserve,
and good geriatric anaesthesia anticipates,
protects and gently supports a system that has little margin to spare.
Say more about the cardiac conducting system in ageing and the resulting
arrhythmias.
The cardiac conducting system undergoes characteristic degenerative change with age
that predisposes the elderly to bradyarrhythmias and tachyarrhythmias alike.
There is progressive fibrosis and fatty infiltration of the conducting tissue,
and a marked loss of pacemaker cells in the sinoatrial node — by old age only a
small fraction of the original number may remain — which slows the intrinsic rate
and predisposes to sinus node dysfunction, the sick sinus syndrome,
with inappropriate bradycardia, pauses and chronotropic incompetence,
so the heart cannot raise its rate appropriately under stress.
Fibrosis of the atrioventricular node and the His–Purkinje system causes conduction
delay and the various degrees of heart block,
and the prevalence of bundle branch block rises with age.
Atrial fibrosis and dilatation, often compounded by hypertension and diastolic
dysfunction, make atrial fibrillation common,
and because the ageing ventricle depends on the atrial contribution to filling,
the loss of organised atrial contraction in fibrillation,
and any associated rapid rate, are poorly tolerated and may precipitate
decompensation.
The implications are that the elderly tolerate both extremes of rate badly,
that perioperative arrhythmia is common,
that conduction disease may be unmasked by anaesthesia,
and that some patients arrive with pacemakers requiring specific perioperative
management.
So ageing fibroses the conducting system, causing sinus node dysfunction,
conduction block and atrial fibrillation,
all poorly tolerated by a preload-dependent heart and demanding vigilance and
careful rate and rhythm management.
Discuss the endocrine and glucose-handling changes of ageing.
Ageing brings a general decline and dysregulation of endocrine function relevant to
the perioperative period.
Glucose handling is the most important:
insulin sensitivity falls and beta-cell responsiveness declines,
so glucose tolerance worsens and a degree of insulin resistance and hyperglycaemia
is common even without overt diabetes,
while the prevalence of type-two diabetes itself rises steeply with age.
This matters because perioperative hyperglycaemia is associated with infection and
poor wound healing, and because the elderly diabetic may have autonomic neuropathy,
silent ischaemia and gastroparesis.
Thyroid function may decline, and hypothyroidism is commoner and often subclinical,
slowing metabolism and drug handling and occasionally presenting atypically.
The hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis still mounts a stress response to surgery,
but the regulation is less precise.
The growth hormone and sex steroid axes decline,
contributing to the loss of muscle and bone.
Vitamin D deficiency and secondary changes in calcium handling are common.
Thirst and the osmoregulatory release of antidiuretic hormone are altered,
contributing to fluid disturbance.
The practical implications are to screen for and manage diabetes and
hyperglycaemia, to consider occult thyroid disease,
and to anticipate the consequences of autonomic neuropathy.
So ageing impairs glucose tolerance and predisposes to diabetes and subclinical
thyroid disease, with perioperative implications for glycaemic control,
infection risk and atypical presentation.
How does immune senescence affect the elderly surgical patient?
The ageing immune system undergoes immunosenescence,
a remodelling that leaves the elderly both less able to respond to new threats and
prone to a low-grade chronic inflammatory state.
Adaptive immunity declines: thymic involution reduces the output of naïve T cells,
so the repertoire available to recognise new antigens shrinks,
vaccine responses are weaker, and the response to novel infection is impaired.
B-cell function and antibody affinity also decline.
Innate immunity is dysregulated rather than simply reduced,
with altered neutrophil and macrophage function.
Superimposed is inflammaging, a chronic,
low-grade elevation of circulating inflammatory cytokines,
which contributes to frailty, sarcopenia and the progression of age-related
disease, and may amplify the inflammatory response to surgical injury.
The consequences for the surgical patient are an increased susceptibility to
perioperative infection — surgical site,
respiratory and urinary — often with a blunted or atypical presentation such as
absent fever or simply delirium and functional decline,
so infection must be actively sought; impaired wound healing;
and a potentially exaggerated or dysregulated systemic inflammatory response to
major surgery.
The responses are meticulous infection prevention,
a high index of suspicion for occult sepsis, attention to nutrition,
and minimising surgical insult.
So immunosenescence leaves the elderly more vulnerable to infection that presents
atypically, with impaired healing and a dysregulated inflammatory response,
all of which raise perioperative risk and demand vigilance.
What problems does polypharmacy pose, and how do drug interactions feature?
Polypharmacy — the concurrent use of multiple medicines — is the norm in the
elderly, who often take many regular drugs for multiple chronic conditions,
and it poses several perioperative problems.
The first is the sheer burden of drug effects and interactions: the more drugs,
the greater the chance of adverse effects, drug–drug interactions,
and additive effects such as the cumulative anticholinergic burden or the combined
hypotensive effect of several cardiovascular drugs interacting with anaesthesia.
The second is the management of these drugs around surgery — deciding which to
continue, such as most cardiac and respiratory drugs and, in modified form,
antiparkinsonian and steroid therapy; which to withhold,
such as certain antihypertensives that may exaggerate hypotension,
or oral hypoglycaemics; and how to handle anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents,
balancing thrombotic against bleeding risk.
The third is the reduced reserve that makes the elderly more susceptible to the
adverse effects in the first place,
and the difficulty of an accurate drug history in the cognitively impaired.
Interactions with anaesthetic agents are common — for example,
the potentiation of hypotension, the serotonergic risk of combining certain
antidepressants with some opioids, and the interaction of anticonvulsants with
neuromuscular blockers.
The responses are a careful, reconciled medication history,
deliberate perioperative medication planning, and minimising additional drugs.
So polypharmacy multiplies adverse effects and interactions in a patient with
little reserve, and safe care requires accurate reconciliation,
a clear continue-or-withhold plan, and restraint in adding further drugs.
Are there particular considerations for regional anaesthesia in the elderly?
Regional anaesthesia has particular attractions and particular pitfalls in the
elderly.
Its attractions are real: it can avoid or reduce the doses of general anaesthetic
agents and opioids to which the ageing brain and respiratory system are so
sensitive, may reduce postoperative delirium and respiratory complications in
selected cases, provides excellent analgesia that aids early mobilisation,
and avoids airway instrumentation in a difficult neck.
Several physiological changes alter the technique.
Neuraxial blocks tend to spread more extensively for a given dose,
partly because of age-related changes in the spine and the epidural space and
reduced cerebrospinal fluid volume,
so doses are often reduced and the block titrated.
The sympathetic block of neuraxial anaesthesia is poorly compensated by the blunted
baroreflex and stiff, preload-dependent circulation,
so hypotension can be pronounced and must be anticipated and managed with careful
fluid and vasopressor use.
Degenerative spinal disease — calcified ligaments, osteophytes,
scoliosis — can make the approach technically difficult.
Coexisting anticoagulation must be respected.
Peripheral nerve blocks are valuable and avoid the haemodynamic effects of
neuraxial techniques.
Communication and positioning of a patient who may be cognitively impaired,
deaf or arthritic require patience.
So regional anaesthesia offers genuine benefits in sparing general agents and
providing analgesia, but its doses,
its haemodynamic effects and its technical conduct must all be adjusted for the
physiology and anatomy of age.
Postoperative delirium is common in this group. How is it prevented and managed?
Postoperative delirium is an acute, fluctuating disturbance of attention,
awareness and cognition, common after surgery in the elderly, distressing,
and associated with longer hospital stay, functional and cognitive decline,
institutionalisation and increased mortality,
so its prevention is a priority of geriatric perioperative care.
The approach is chiefly preventive and multicomponent,
because once established it is hard to treat.
Modifiable risk factors are addressed across the pathway:
identifying high-risk patients, especially those with pre-existing cognitive
impairment or frailty; avoiding deliriogenic drugs — particularly anticholinergics,
benzodiazepines and, where possible, high-dose opioids — and minimising sedation;
treating pain adequately, since untreated pain itself causes delirium,
using multimodal and regional analgesia; maintaining physiological stability,
oxygenation, glucose and fluid balance, and treating infection.
Non-pharmacological measures are central and evidence-based: reorientation,
ensuring glasses and hearing aids are available,
promoting normal sleep–wake cycles, early mobilisation, hydration and nutrition,
family presence, and avoiding unnecessary lines and catheters.
When delirium occurs, the first step is to seek and treat the precipitant;
supportive, reorientating care is the mainstay,
with low-dose antipsychotics reserved for severe agitation that threatens safety,
and benzodiazepines avoided except in alcohol withdrawal.
So postoperative delirium is best managed by prevention — identifying risk,
avoiding precipitating drugs, treating pain, maintaining physiology,
and applying the non-pharmacological bundle — with drug treatment a limited last
resort.
What is the role of sarcopenia, nutrition and prehabilitation?
Sarcopenia, the age-related loss of skeletal muscle mass and function,
is a core component of frailty and a powerful determinant of perioperative outcome,
and it interacts closely with nutrition.
With ageing, muscle mass and strength decline through reduced physical activity,
anabolic resistance, hormonal change,
chronic low-grade inflammation and often inadequate protein intake;
the result is weakness, reduced physiological reserve, impaired mobility,
poorer respiratory muscle function and cough,
and greater vulnerability to the catabolic stress of surgery.
Malnutrition is common and frequently unrecognised in the elderly,
compounding sarcopenia, impairing wound healing and immunity,
and predicting complications.
These are, importantly, partly modifiable,
which is the rationale for prehabilitation:
the deliberate optimisation of the patient's condition in the weeks before planned
surgery through structured exercise to build cardiorespiratory and muscular
reserve, nutritional support with attention to adequate protein,
and the treatment of anaemia and comorbidity,
often combined with psychological preparation.
Evidence increasingly supports such multimodal prehabilitation in raising measured
fitness and, in some settings, improving outcomes and recovery after major surgery.
Screening for malnutrition and frailty identifies those who will benefit.
So sarcopenia and malnutrition are prevalent,
harmful and partly reversible contributors to surgical risk in the elderly,
and prehabilitation — exercise, nutrition and optimisation before surgery — is the
strategy that targets them to build reserve.
How do sensory and cognitive decline affect communication, capacity and consent?
Sensory and cognitive changes of ageing have direct practical and ethical
implications for the conduct of perioperative care.
Hearing and vision commonly decline, so communication may be impaired:
the patient may not hear explanations or instructions,
may appear confused when they are simply deaf,
and is disoriented without their glasses and hearing aids — which is also why
ensuring these are available is part of delirium prevention.
Cognitive decline ranges from normal age-related slowing through mild cognitive
impairment to established dementia, and its prevalence rises steeply with age.
This bears on capacity and consent.
Capacity is decision-specific and must be assessed for the particular decision at
hand: whether the patient can understand the relevant information, retain it,
weigh it, and communicate a choice.
Cognitive impairment does not automatically remove capacity,
and every effort must be made to support it — clear, unhurried communication,
the right sensory aids, involving family.
Where capacity is genuinely lacking,
decisions are made in the patient's best interests through the appropriate legal
framework, involving those close to the patient and any advance directive or
appointed proxy.
Pre-existing cognitive impairment also predicts postoperative delirium and decline,
so it should be screened for and documented.
So sensory and cognitive decline demand patient, aided communication,
careful decision-specific capacity assessment with support to maximise autonomy,
and proper best-interests processes when capacity is absent,
alongside their role in predicting and preventing delirium.
Which specific anaesthetic drugs do you favour or avoid in the elderly, and why?
Drug selection in the elderly follows from the altered kinetics,
the heightened sensitivity, and the vulnerability to delirium and accumulation,
and several practical preferences emerge.
For induction, agents are given in reduced dose and titrated slowly to effect,
allowing for delayed circulation; the haemodynamic effect of any agent is
exaggerated. For maintenance, the volatile concentration is reduced in line with
the lower minimum alveolar concentration.
For opioids, shorter-acting and more predictable agents are attractive:
remifentanil, cleared by plasma esterases independently of organ function,
gives controllable analgesia, while morphine and its renally excreted active
metabolite accumulate and demand dose reduction and caution.
For muscle relaxation, organ-independent clearance is valuable:
atracurium and cisatracurium, eliminated by Hofmann degradation,
avoid the prolonged effect that renal and hepatic impairment impose on renally
excreted relaxants, and neuromuscular monitoring is essential to detect residual
block, to which the elderly are prone.
Crucially, the deliriogenic drugs are minimised:
long-acting benzodiazepines and anticholinergics,
particularly the centrally acting atropine and hyoscine, are avoided,
with glycopyrronium preferred when an antimuscarinic is needed and sugammadex an
attractive reversal agent that avoids the antimuscarinic altogether.
Multimodal and regional analgesia reduces opioid load.
So the favoured drugs are those with organ-independent or rapid clearance and a low
propensity for delirium — remifentanil, atracurium,
glycopyrronium — given in reduced, titrated doses,
with deliriogenic and accumulating agents deliberately avoided.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Ageing is the progressive loss of physiological reserve,
distinct from but compounded by comorbidity;
the resting elderly patient may look fit yet decompensate under stress.
Second, The cardiovascular system stiffens — systolic hypertension,
diastolic dysfunction, blunted baroreflex and beta-response — giving a
preload-dependent, pressure-labile circulation intolerant of under- or over-filling.
Third, Reduced elastic recoil raises closing capacity above functional residual
capacity, lowering resting PaO2, while blunted hypoxic and hypercapnic drives
increase sensitivity to opioid respiratory depression.
Fourth, Altered body composition, reduced binding and reduced renal and hepatic
clearance, with heightened CNS sensitivity and a MAC falling ~6% per decade, mean:
start low, go slow, titrate to effect.
Fifth, Impaired thermoregulation, vulnerability to delirium and cognitive
dysfunction, fragile bones, joints and skin,
and aspiration risk all demand active warming,
gentle handling and avoidance of deliriogenic drugs;
frailty predicts outcome better than age.
Thank you. That concludes the station.